So, in the previous modules, in module
one, we briefly discussed, explained SS7.
That's signaling system seven,
which is a rich,
out-of-band signalling protocol
that is the data plane and
the control plane are on
different streams.
This was a very very
powerful architecture and
AT&T wanted to leverage the system
to increase their revenues.
Of course.
For the carriers, in those days,
and even now,
if you're getting $40 per subscriber,
per month, that is really good business.
And any features that you add
on top of that, they were gravy.
So AT&T sends out a big memo to all
the engineers to come up with ideas.
And there was this engineer,
Roy Weber, go goes sees manager and
tells him his idea of
scaling collect calling.
Collect calling is
[COUGH] you don't pay for
the call, the receiving party
actually foots the bill.
And he wanted to scale this for
businesses so
that when customers call, they don't foot
the bill, the business foots the bill.
And his manager said,
Roy, that's a pretty dumb idea,
go back to work on something else.
And Mr. Weber listened to his manager and
promptly went on to work on his idea,
which turned out to be the 1-800 system.
So this is how it will actually work.
There is a big database that is
connected with SS7 links off the switch.
And in this switch,
they have given away all
these 1 800 numbers for
different categories, right?
And the database actually
has the translation
between this fictitious 1-800 numbers and
some physical numbers.
So in this case,
Bob wants to find a dentist.
So he calls 1-800-Dentist.
And the switch looks at the 800 number and
takes Bob's area code,
555 and goes to this SS7 database and
in the database it looks at the area
code and the 800 dentist combination.
Finds a physical number
that belongs to a dentist,
and it comes up with Sheldon,
who is a dentist.
And it gives that number to the switch.
The switch then calls Sheldon to see
if he's willing to pick up the call.
As soon as Sheldon picks up the phone,it
will establish a data line between Bob and
Sheldon so
they can continue the discussion.
All of this happens between
three to five rings of
Bob calling the phone and
It became such a huge success,
it was essentially 40% of
all long distance traffic.
And the impact on businesses was so
huge that they ran out of 800 numbers.
They had to invent 888, 877, 855.
You can do the math of how big it was for
AT&T.
Til FCC broke up AT&T in 1984.
AT&T actually owned all the numbers
including the 800 numbers so
this was a good cash gravy and
AT&T went on to try bunch of other things.
These are the things that were
leveraging the similar architecture.
For each of these services,
there would be ten dollars to set up
the service and four dollars per month for
each of the features.
So, if you missed a call,
you could dial *69 and
you will be connected to
the person who just called you.
The switch just remembers who just
called and the call wasn't completed.
*66 is, if the other side is busy,
it keeps on calling that person for
about 30 minutes and call you back
immediately when that line gets free.
And *60, you can have your phone
number ignored for up to ten numbers.
Maybe your in-laws calling you and you
don't want to even have your phone ring.
Surprisingly, at last, some of these ideas
were bringing lots of additional revenues.
And some of them never really took off and
don't even exist in
the presence of cellphones.
But I just wanted to give
you an idea of things that,
features that people were thinking of.
This particular architecture
was actually leveraged for
many over services that
are currently in operation.
Number portability,
location-based services, in fact,
some of the basic wireless
networking protocols are based
on these ideas of SS7 signaling.